Networking complete tutorial
https://homenetworkguy.com/how-to/beginners-guide-to-set-up-home-network-using-opnsense/

My setup: 

1. WAN connected through Wifi extender to modem upstairs from the ISP
2. On managed switch patch cable is going from WAN port of extender over to (port 8) connected from (port 7) over to OPNSense router.
3. LAN is also connected to switch to bridge the two together
4. Port 6 is for main workstations
5. Port 5 is for Wifi AP.

---

This is the setup that I did to start my homelab I did a dry run of this and now have everything dialed in how I want based on the Dev.to article by Patima Poochai


Refer to the network diagram below: 


Goals of the project 
    - setup the network with OPNSense
    - setup on the network a WAP
    - get everything cable managed
    - wifi extender configuration
    - VLAN assignment for switch


The planning part was the easiest, where we are setup in our apartment the Modem from the ISP is a direct line of sight below us and the Wifi Extender is set up to pick up that traffic.  It also has some cool features that allow you to configure a DHCP but I'll get to that later. 

The reason behind why I wanted to create a home-lab was to not only have better service downstairs but to also set up a safe space to build stuff and experiment with.  Ethernet speeds usually are better and more reliable but I'm aware also that failover is a big possibility with this type of setup and I don't have the money to throw for a second ISP router. 

1. Setup the Wifi Extender and get it connected to your ISP.  Sadly the security settings on these devices aren't the greatest. Before getting it configured to the existing network I did an update of the firmware to make sure that it was the latest version before getting network configured.  With TP-Link it's pretty good with installing new firmware.  I then connect it to the existing network, configure it so that way it's not broadcasting a LAN through Wifi signals. I decided to do this to minimize any security risks on my personal network since I'm building it for myself and my experiments.  

Test the connections and make sure they are correct, after that make sure that you update the password to a more secure one, unfortunately they don't offer any more security options so I'll be looking at better options to update down the road.  Once you update your password, be sure to save it and make sure that it's correct otherwise you'll be locked out.  At least with this device it's a good idea to download the configuration that you just made, another good feature about this Wifi-Extender is that it gives the option to drag and drop configuration files and also new firmware.  Once you confirm connectivity, password, and any personal settings that you need you're all done and set with getting your Wifi extender up and running. 

2. Managed switch, one of the great suggestions in the Dev.to article was to purchase a managed switch this is actually really helpful especially with wanting to create VLAN's and aggregate them to other ports that are on the switch. 